And Meanwhile, for those who are
in the session, I mean you can
post your questions in the chat
box. And sean will ask me, I
mean, based on the first come
first serve. Uh.
In the beginning of this
session, I will answer some
questions that I mean other
students ask me through email.
And then we'll start the topics.
Thank you.
And there's a question asked. It
says uh, is there anything due
tomorrow? Uh, no. Actually the I
mean, uh, the first of all,
there are no assignment for the
first week. So we only have
lecture assignment in the second
week, so I'm going to release it
today. It's already on
blackboard, but I have to make
an announcement that the
lectures are known for the
second week actually is
released. And also the lab
assignments already released at
the deadline for both of them
are October 1st.
So it starts from this week and
you have one week to do the
assignments, the lab or the
lecture. So it becomes a.
October 1st I believe let me
check the you can see the
deadline. Yes, it's October 1st.
One thing is that.
Uh, because of the time zone
difference, the deadline is
Wednesday midnight anywhere on
the Earth, but anywhere on the
Earth is an island mean close to
New Zealand, I guess. So the
place that actually the.
Day ends all around the world so
and it is about 677 AM Ontario
time. So basically it becoms
next day after Wednesday 7:00
AM. So based on the Eastern
Time, so officially it's
Wednesday, midnight anywhere on
the Earth, but based on the
Ontario time or Eastern Time
it's 7:00 AM next day, which is
Thursday. And the deadline
for the first Lab and
assignments lecture
assignments are October 1st.
There's another question about.
Do we use the 5th edition of the
textbook instead of the 6th?
I believe so, but, uh,
yes. There's a 5th
edition for that, but.
Uh. I'm not sure how can you. I
mean. I mean I can.
Uh, you access the
book. Usually the online version
is available for you.
And there is no much difference
based on the topics we covered.
Actually, there's not much
difference from the 1st edition
to the six edition, so all the
topics we're covering is kind
of, I mean, well established
topics that actually it present.
I mean it is in the first second
up until 6 edition.
But I I'm not sure I
understand it. I mean, why
are you looking for the 5th
editions of the 6th edition?
It might be cheaper
or something else.
Alexa. Actually.
Oh, that's fine, so that's OK.
As I said, I mean there's not
much difference between the
first 2 to 6 edition based on
the topics we're covering.
But The thing is that I am
coming some other concepts in
my slides that you have to
study these slides and these I
mean topics are not in the
book, it is in the book, but
it's not explained in the book.
So it is in the assignments or
in the practices or examples.
So let's find.
In the. And the blackboard let
me show you the blackboard.
In the blackboard, if you go to
the. Here office. So if you
click on the office.
It goes to the same page that
you can enter the class or the
sections, but in the office you
can see their instructor office
hour. So these are the scheduled
office are for myself.
From 10:00 to 11:00 after the lecture so
Monday 10:00 to 11:00 and Wednesday
10:00 to 11:00. So basically, for
instance the next one gonna be
today, so today is 23rd of
September from 10:00 to 11:00.
I'm going to be here so when it
when they 10 AM comes it becomes
active and then you can enter
the office hour.
Is not active anymore, right? I
mean right now. But I mean at
10:00 AM it becomes active.
So Monday Wednesday 10:00 to 11:00.
And you can enter the
office over here.
Is there any other questions?
Uh, there's about one note.
There's only one attempt for the
lab. Yes, actually be. The
reason is that this one at Sam
for the lab, but The thing is,
if you made a mistake or you I
I got an email from the student.
Who did an empty submission? Uh,
just buy some mistakes. So it
happens, that's OK. Just send me
an email or you're a lab
instructor so we can open
another attempt for you. But we
try to limit it just one
submission because the TA grader
wanted to start the grading so
they have to know they have the
grade. Just one submission of
yours, so that's why we limited
to one submission, but.
Again, if you made a
mistake or something
happens with your
submission, just let us
know the lab instructor an
myself too so I can enable
it for you for another
submission or resubmission.
So I hope I addressed your
question so that two more thing
let me back to.
Uh, one more thing is that.
About the discussion board.
I've been set by the Department
that the 10% is huge amount of
bonus point, so I wanted to
reduce it to 5% and still
there's a bonus point there. So
5 marks from 100 marks, so I
will adjust this in the course
outline and I will post it in
the blackboard and make an
announcement about that. And
again as I said there will no
assignment in the first week,
so the assignments for the
lecture assignments.
It started at second week this
week and it goes from the week
number 2 to week number 11.
So 10 lecture assignments. So
that's a start.
In order to just know that you
have there again like previous
sections, you have the focus to
this slide and we are ready to
start. Please send me some
feedback. I mean just emoji
icons or I mean happy.
Or, uh, not happy. I mean emoji
icons just to make sure that you
are listening to the lecture.
That's great, that's great.
Everybody seems ready.
Cool, let's start.
Uh, last session we end up with
a fraction how to add fraction
numbers in a numbering system.
So we just I just wanted to do a
very quick recap on the fraction
concept or topic as we said, in
order to have a fraction.
Uh, we just have to divide 1
unit by subunits. So if you are
in base four, we divide 1 unit
by 4 so it becomes 1 / 4 or 4 to
the power of minus one. And if
you wanted to pick just one
section, it becomes 01 in base
four and that one has the
significance of four to the
power of minus one or 1 / 4.
And we put that in dot as a
fraction point, so anything on
the right side is the fraction.
Part, left side is the integer
part. If we need two, we said
that two part from the 1 / 4
sections subsections, so it
becomes .2 in base 4.
33.3 so three subsections of
each one has the significance of
four to the power of minus one.
And then when we have whole unit
or four subunits, so it becomes
one to the integer part.
So in order to find the distance
of moon to this sun based on the
fraction, we have 4123 and four
in base four is 1 zero and then
two. Subunits of 1 / 4 so it
becomes 10.2 in the base 4.
Again, you said that we can have
more precision. Uh, by dividing
the subunits into sub sub units,
so 1 / 4 divided by another 4
section becomes in the last
lecture we we made, I made a
mistake. So 1 / 4 / 4 becomes 2
to the four to the power minus
two or 1 / 16.
So this is a little bit any more
precise sub sub section.
So if we need 1 section
it becoms this .01.
.02 to 2 subsection so that two has
the significance of four to the
power of minus 2.
And then three and four when we
have 4 sub sub section in this
one subsection or 4 * 4 to the
power of minus two, which
becomes 4 to the power minus
one. So .1 in base 4.
So then we have a more precise
distance. Now we have 4.2
subsection and one sub sub
section. So this is the I mean
through distance based on this
picture from moon to the sun.
Again, if you want to, if you
need more precision, we can
divide that. I mean 4 to the
power of minus 2 by another
four, it becomes 4 to the power
of minus three, so or 1 / 64
subsections. So it gives
more precision.
So imagine we are given this
number. We put the fraction
point, hear anything on the left
is the integer part on the
right? Is the fraction part
If you are in the base four, so
based on the base for the left
side is the significance of the
position or based on the
increasing powers of four
positive from zero to 7 to 8
positions of integer. And to the
right the fraction part,
significance, significance of
the position are decreasing from
minus one to minus 5 five positions
of fraction and then in order to
see what's this number in
decimal system or what's the
value of this number in base 10.
We have to do very similar at
with it. So basically just do
the sum multiplication of each
digit to the significance of
each position and then some
together. For the fraction part,
the same digits, each digit
multiplied by the significance
of the position, and then all
sum together. So usually when
we are given the I mean
fraction number with a
fraction part in the base.
We do the integer about
first and then the fraction
part next and then together.
So the fact the.
Integer part is this point,
the fraction part.
And this is the general
formulation math simulation, so
any number N in base R.
If it wants to go to the decimal
system, so base 10.
Uh, so we have to put the
fraction point first here and
then they for the integer
part. Some of the powers. So
by multiplying each digit to
the R to the power of 0 to N
- 1 to the right, the same,
but this time the powers of R
are starting from minus one
to minus M.
And so this way we have n
integer part we have M fraction
part, but pay attention from the
fraction party so far, minus one
to minus M. But for the integer
part with the cell from zero to
N - 1.
So. And here is the minimum
number. Minimum number is always
in any base are putting 0 in all
positions for the integer and
fraction part, so it becomes 0.0
in decimal. The maximum is
putting the large digits the
largest digits. For instance, if
you are in base R, the largest
digit is R - 1, so putting all
minus one in all positions in
the integer part and in all
position in the fraction part.
And the maximum the integer part
as we did calculation before R
to the power N - 1. But this is
a lecture assignment. What's the
maximum fraction part? If we
repeat the largest digit in all
positional fraction part.
And the unit of Increment is.
All the Integer is zero and the
fraction for the last position
which has the lowest
significance is 1 / M or R to
the powers minus m.
in decimal system.
So let's practice in base two
and base two as we see if you're
given an position four position
for the integer part, three
position for the fraction part.
We'll start with zero the
minimum value, so all the
positions are zero, and then
next unit cannot be one in the
lowest significant position, so
it becomes one in the two to the
power of minus three's, which is
equal to 1 or 8 zero .125 in
base 10. The next number is just
adding this number by one, so
adding this number by one
becomes this, so simply says
that I mean another.
0.125 plus
0.125 so two times this, so
it becomes 0.25.
If you see here I mean,
uh, each unit just adding 0.125
each step. And then we
reach the one unit when we are
next step after finishing all
the availabilities in the
fraction part. So after
this number 0.875 plus
this number becomes one.
So by doing the math calculation
you reach to the same number. So
just multiply each digit to
significance of the positions.
So the next question is.
So based on this system, as we
saw, the maximum number in this
system a given four position in
the integer part and three
position in the fraction product
cannot be this. So just
repeating your largest number
because you are in the base 2
the largest digit is 1. So
repeating one in the integer
part and repeating one in the
fraction part. And if you
calculate this number in decimal
system it becomes 15.875.
So, but I mean, this is the
maximum fraction part when
you are given a three
position in the base 2.
So the next important question
is so now we know that the unit
of Increment by based on this
system is 0.125. So if you are
given a number one.
.02 in base 10 is it possible
to represent this number in
this binary system?
As we know, the unit of
increment Here is 0.125, so but
this is this unit 0 point.
Sorry, .02 is a little bit
lower than  .125.
So the answer is no.
Uh, and what's the solution?
Uh, we are given a binary system
with this limit, I mean three
fraction part and four integer
part. But how can we represent
this number? So anybody has the
idea to represent 1.02 in this
system so you can see that from
one it goes to 1.125 so.
Uh, in between there is no
option to represent any number
within this range.
So what's the solution?
Yes, Brandon says that we can
add a smaller unit so by a
smaller unit, what do you mean?
Yes, increasing the number of
m so it's smaller unit means
that just divide this number 1 /
8 further. But because we're in
phase two, we can divide it by
two so it becomes 1 / 4 to the
two to the power of minus four
or 1 / 16.
Also we can, I mean put
introduce newer. I mean a
smaller smaller units, so just
by adding position to the
fraction part, we can increase
the precision. And we can
represent a wider range of a
fraction parts.
So the solution is more
precision, more fraction
positions, or more m as I
actually Hassan says.
So what the question is, how
many position we have to add?
1 1 further two further so, for
instance, the M must be equal to
what number? For instance 10. If
you are given 10 fraction
position in the radix tool, is
it possible to?
Represent that number. So this
is a question that you have to
think about. That. For instance,
in mid term exam or in any
assignment you are given a
number which is not able to
represent represented by given
fraction part. So they asked how
can we extend the fraction part
to represent the number exactly.
But another solution is this.
We are limited to this system so
we are not allowed to add any
fraction pool positions, so
another solution is finding the
closest number and then accept
some errors as we did when we
calculate the most distant to
sun before having fractions. So
with before having fraction part
we said that we can roughly
assume that the most distance to
Sun is about 5 units.
But then we introduce integer
part the fraction part.
Here we do the same. You said
that this is the limit. So
within this system we have to
represent 1.02. So let's find
the closest number and then
accept some sort of error.
So the two most similar number,
closest number 2, the 1.02, is
this the one itself and 1.125.
So which one has the lower or
smaller as we can calculate the
error so this number in decimal
number is 1 and this number in
decimal system is 1.125.
So if we, I mean, subtract this
number from these numbers, the
error becomes this so easily you
can see that I mean the this
number has a lower error, so we
can represent one or 1.000.
As the representation for 1.02
and accepting error of 0.02.
So this is another way. Just by
accepting some sort of errors.
Let's do a practice in
radix four. If you go
to the base for system.
In base 4.
The sun, if we are given 4
integer part and three fraction
part the significance of the
fraction part or based on
decreasing powers of four from
minus one to minus three And
from the integer part from zero.
2 three SO 4 positions.
So the minimum value is 0. The
next step gonna be just having
one in the lowest significant
position. So it becomes this
number 1 divided by a 64 or 1 *
4 to the power of minus three.
So this is the unit the smallest
unit of Increment in this system
for base 4.
The next is 2 because we are in
base four, so we can have the
non digit 2.
So the next unit is this.
The next major three, so 3, /,
64 and etc.
So you can see that I mean, but
this unit of Increment will
reach up until one. So when we
are at one, we already fill out
all the availabilities in the
fashion for 333. So this is the
largest. Fraction part in
the base for when we are
given three positions.
And then from one the next
step, next step and it said so
the maximum number gonna have
three in all positions, so
three in the integer part and
free in the fraction part.
This is the maximum number in
this system in base 4.
So the same question, is it
possible to represent 1.02
base 10 in this system?
Anybody can answer this
question.
You can put your answers
in the chat box.
Yes, the answer is no, because
as you can see here, the unit of
Increment is from zero to this
number. And then from this
number today. So two times this
number. So this is the unit of
Increment. Uh, but here we
need to represent 0.02.
It's from here is actually
goes to this number. So in
this system we cannot
represent any fraction number
between these two numbers. So
the answer is no.
And you know why? And the reason
is as before, we can have more
precision, and this is some or
find the closest number.
So in order to find the closest
number we can have, we have to.
Uh, find the available numbers
here. Very close to this number.
If you do some calculation at
home, you can see that after
one. You go to the next unit of
Increment, which is this. So
this is the fraction part, the
minimum precision. So one and
then the next is 1. This one so.
This is the fraction part
without any integer part.
So these two numbers are the
most closest numbers to this
number. And if you calculate the
error. So this number.
1001 with the point here is
equal to this number. So if you
subtract this number from this,
it becomes this error.
So the same for the second
number and we can see that.
Uh, this one has the lower error
or a smaller error, so we can
represent this number in base 10
in the base 4 by this 1.001.
Although this number is equal to
1.015 something, but we can
accept an error an we can accept
this as the representation of
1.02 in base 4.
At home you can do the same
practice for the other basis
eight 10 16 and you can see that.
I mean sometimes when you
convert a number to another
numbering system, it's not
possible to do that, so we have
to accept some errors.
So I'm going to.
A start new topic, but I'm ready
for your questions. If you have
any so. Let's back to the.
Is there any questions?
Oh, Marco says that I possible
to let me back to the.
slide.
Oh uh, it's uh,
let me go to the.
So your question, Oh, I see a
we'll do it. We'll see. We'll
see right now the question is
this. Uh, let me come back here
here. The question is that.
How can we know that this number
is equal to this number?
The thing.
They think this is the number in
the binary, so 11. This is the
maximum binary with fraction
plus. So based on the
calculation with it here, here.
Here you can you have to simply
multiply each digit based on the
powers of two, so 1 * 2 to
the power of their. We have four
positions, so it becomes 4 - 1
becomes 3 plus up until 1 * 2
to the power of 0 point and etc
so. The same as you did here. So
for this one, for instance this
one, this one is equal to 0 * 2
to the power of 3 zero
multiplied to the power up until
here, because zero is
multiplied, so the result is 0
and then here 1 * 2 to the power
of minus one.
1 to 5 * 2 to the power of
minus 2 ,0. And this is the
result. So the same way we
can convert this number to
the decimal system.
OK.
So.
I see I mean a question
from Marco ,Marco.
Is am I mean answering your
question or? You still
have questions.
Cool, so let's move
on the next slide.
The next topics in today's.
So conversion, now we want to
see as we did, given a
number in any numbering system.
Is it possible to transform it
to another numbering system?
We already saw number from
base R. We want to convert
it to another numbering
system. or radix
system or prime.
So we already saw how we can do
the transformation from any
numbering system based on base
R to, decimal system or base 10.
So basically based on that math
formulation, you just simply
have to multiply each digit to
the significance of the position
based on the powers of R and
then some together. So you do
this for integer part. You do
that for you do the same
calculation for the fraction
part and then.
And with the number in decimal
system. So we already knew how
to convert any numbering in any
other numbering system to
decimal system, but how about
so? This is the formulation.
As we saw before.
But how about the reverse?
If you're giving a number
in decimal system, how can
we convert it to the uh,
base r numbering system?
So in order to figure out an
algorithm. Let's do some trivial
things. Just convert a decimal
number to its own decimal
number. It is trivial, but it
gives. It gives an idea that how
can we convert from any decimal
number to any other numbering
system on base R.
So let's. Having this number,
let's assume we have this number
in base 10.
So in order to generate a number
in any numbering system, we have
to generate the digits.
So in order to represent this
number in the base 10 itself, so
we have to 1st generate the
digit in the first position
based on the significance of 10
to the power of 0.
Then the next digit based on
the significance of 10 to the
power of 1 or the second
position, and then the third
position. The significance is
10 to the power of two. So if
you aren't generate digits,
we have to find the digits.
The digit in each position.
So basically, if you are given a
this number, let me.
this number we have to generate
the digits of each positions
based on the significance of
increasing powers of time.
So this is equal to do this. So
if I have the first position an
add, put the first position so.
Then the result is a number
without the first position, so
three becomes the first position
with the significance of that to
the power of 0.
And then if I add to three.
So we have this number and now
one becomes the first position.
And etc. So by just outputing
the digits from the right side,
we can assume that each digit
has a significance 10 to the
power of 0.
So how can we do that? How can
we just extract the first
position from a decimal number?
We do this by just dividing by
10 as we did in the high school
or primary school. So whenever
we wanted to see the first
position, 1st digit of a number,
we just divided by 10.
So as you can see here, if I
divide this number by 10, the
quotient. Actually, is this
without the first position
and the remainder is the
first position.
So by just one division we can
end up we can have the first
position digit. And the
remainders.
The the other actually digits of
the number. So for the second
one. We can assume that there is
no first position, so we don't
have one anymore. So here is the
number. So the previous quotient
becomes the new number, and then
we do another division. So by
another division we just, the
remainder is the.
A digit in the first position.
And the quotient becomes the
remainders. The remaining
digits. So the second division
gives us the 2nd digit.
The Third Division give us the
third actually digit, but the
division, the Third Division are
based on the previous quotient.
So this is the way. So just by
one division. The remainder is
the 1st Digit, Second Division
for the new number or the
quotient becomes the 2nd digit.
3rd digit 4th digit an up
until. The last digit bill after
that, is when the quotient
becomes 0. So, uh, when I
are, our number has already has.
8. Uh, digits, so we did
eight division to produce the
all 8 digits. But whenever we
want to write this down, we go
from the reverse order so.
30302131.
So this is the way we
reproduce same number in
the decimal system.
So you have the idea right now
that how can we produce the
digits in decimal system.
So the same algorithm can be
applied to convert to any other
numbering system. Imagine we are
given in number in decimal and
we wanted to convert it to base
16. So we just do the same.
Divide the number by 16 in order
to produce the 1st digit in the
base 16 so the remainder is the
1st digit. And then we divide
the quotient as the new number
by 16, so the remainder becomes
the 2nd digit.
And 3rd and 4th up until.
The quotient becomes zero. Then
the quotient becomes zero. The
the remainder is the last digit.
And then we put it in the
reverse order. So this is the
new number in base 16.
But as we know, uh, in
base, 16 uh.
For 12,14 and 15 there are some other
symbols. So.
The symbols are this as we know
a is 10, B is 11, C is 12, D
is 13,E is 14, and F is 15. So we
have to replace both numbers
with the symbols A to F.
So this is the last I mean
result. So when we converting
this number from decimal to the
base 16, this becomes the number
1C E. 5FB three.
The same procedure when we are
given any number in decimal
system tool. For instance, this
eight. So we divide by 8.
So the number divided by 8 the
remainder and then the new
quotient becomes there. So again
the question you do number
divided by 8. Six is earlier and
up until the quotient becomes 0.
And then they put all the digits
in the reverse order, so this
becomes the new number.
As you can see, when we reduce
the base, we need more positions
to represent the number. This
number in the base 16 because it
has a more I mean larger base.
It needs lower positions,
smaller positions. A smaller
number of positions, but when we
are reducing the base, we need a
larger number of positions.
So this time, if you are
converting the the same number
in decimal system to base four
just divided by 4 up until the
quotient becomes 0.
And then the reverse.
And base two the same.
And as you can see, for the
base two the base is very small
too compared to base 16 or 10.
So we need a lot of positions
to represent this number.
Uh, one thing is that. So this
is the algorithm, so based any
decimal number can go to the
base r system, but just
repeating the division by R and
then putting the remainders in
the reverse order.
So.
I just before going to this I
just wanted to show you that how
can we do this in Excel? Because
sometimes I mean this doing all
these calculations are not.
I mean, you need. It's not a,
It's very time consuming so you
can write a program to do that
for you. Or you can simply use
Excel. I just wanted to show you
that how can you use Excel to.
This.
What ways do you?
So yes, so let me bring up the
Excel so here.
Just simple sheet of Excel, so
this is the number N in decimal
system and we want to use let me
zoom out a little bit yeah?
This is the number in Excel.
And we want to convert it to
base this one the new base. So
we can say this is the R in base
R and this is in.
base 10.
You wanna convert it to?
Base R. And we want to keep this
track of remainder and quotient,
so you can simply say that, for
instance, if this is the number
for instance 102, any five and
you want to convert it to base,
for instance 3.
Because simply have to keep
track of the remainder. So you
can here says that this cell is
equal to. Uh, the remainder in
Excel data function called MoD
or module. So you can say that
modular 125 this cell.
And divided by this.
So the remainder becomes two and
the quotient the integer part of
the division. Uh, you can In the
again in Excel. There is a
function called quotient here.
Can see here.
Quotient and then the quotient
of 125 / 3.
Is equal to 41 and then you have
to repeat this division for 41 so
you can Simply put here. This
one is equal to this cell.
So you have to divide
41 by three again, so
you just repeat 3 here.
And then you just repeat
this one here.
And this one.
Here.
And this one.
So you see that the Excel
actually applied the same
information for each cell, so
we stop at when the quotient
becomes 0, so there is no
need for these cells, so the
result is this.
011122 so let me write
it down so.
011122.
So this is the.
Conversion into base three. So
if you want to convert it to
base, for instance seven, you
just have to simply.
Change this and then.
In base seven, do you think we
need less space or more space?
Less because the base is
actually is larger.
So you can see that we stop at
here. The quotient becomes zero
here. Even if you put all these
zero. We keep this all zero
because the zero code was today.
First, I mean. Let's keep this
year and right this time in base
7 so it becomes 000000, up until
2. 3 6 but even if you keep
all these zero, because it goes
to the left side of the number,
doesn't matter. So you can just
put it, or you can just ignore
them. So it becomes 0.26. So
this is the way you can use
Excel to just to make it
faster in order to convert any
number in the decimal system or
in any other numbering systems.
So. How about I mean?
Any base R to base R'.
We know how to convert to
decimal system and also we know
how to convert decimal system to
any other numbering system. So
from any numbering system or
radix R to R' can be mediated
by decimal system. So if you're
converting base-2 to base
eight, you can convert base-2
to base 10 and then base 10 to
base-8 if you're converting
base three to base nine you can
convert base 9 to decimal
system and then decimal system
to base 9.
So this is the way we do the
conversion with
any numbering system.
For instance, if I wanted to
convert this number in base-16
to base-8, I can simply just
convert this to base 10.
So the algorithm was just
multiplying each digit to the
significance of each position.
Because C is equal to 12, E is
equal to 14 etc and then this is
the sum and there from decimal
to 8, we have to divide by 8.
And then put the reminders
in reverse order.
That's the way we do. I mean,
uh. The conversion from any
numbering system to any other
numbering system based on the
decimal system.
But this was the integer
conversion? How about the
fraction? The same procedure
actually we did for the decimal
system in order to come up with
an algorithm. So again, we can
assume that we wanted to convert
a fraction number in decimal
system to itself.
Just to see how can
we make an algorithm.
So if you are given this number
in decimal system.
The first, I mean, a significant
number is this, I mean just the
number after the fraction point.
Which has the 10 to the power of
minus one. And the 2nd digit is
6, 10 to the power of minus two
and etc. So this time in order
to generate the digit, we have
to extract the digit from the
left side of the fractional part.
So basically we have to do this,
two. And then we extract
two. We end up with the new
fraction number and
then extract 6.
And end up with a new fraction
number and, etc.
So this is the way we generate
the digits of a fraction number
in decimal system. So how can we
extract the digits of the first
digit of a fraction part?
By just multiplying as we did in
the high school. So a
fraction number multiplied by 10
extract makes the 1st digit to
the integer part.
So.
By just one multiplication we
can have the 1st digit in the
fraction part. And then if you
continue the multiplication by
the remainder. So we assume
that there is no other
2 or we start
multiplying by the
remaining fraction part. So
the next digit.
So basically this time instead
of just dividing by 10, we
multiply by 10, so we multiply
the fraction part by 10, keep
the integer part and then
continue multiplication by 10
for the remainder fraction part.
So as you can see, the first
fraction part is 2 and then you
continue multiplied by 10 for
the remaining 6501. So 10
extracts 6, and then we continue
with the multiplication with the
remainder integer part. 5, 0, 1
/ 10. But another difference is
that you have to put the integer
part in the right order because
you are generating from the left
to right, so you put it the
integer part in the right order.
So you multiply by 10
and put the integer part in
the right order.
So now the same algorithm
for converting
decimal fraction number to
base-16 fraction number.
So this was the decimal
number multiplied by 16
results in this. We keep the
integer part four. We
continue the multiplication
with the remainder fraction
part.
So as you can see the results for
3, 13, seven etc.
And we know that 13 is equal to
D. 11 is equal to be B, etc. So
but then we put it digits in the
right order. So this number
becomes this number in base-16.
So for the converting any
fraction number or decimal fraction
number to base-8,
base-2 or any other
basis. For instance 7, 3,
or etc. You can apply the
same algorithm. So again I
wanted to show you how can we
do this in Excel.
So let's.
Just get rid of this.
So imagine now we wanted to.
Convert base number, a
fraction number, for instance,
in decimal system
to another numbering system,
for instance R.
And here is the result of the
multiplication. And here is the
integer part. So for instance,
if I wanted to convert 0.4
to base, for instance,
3. The result should be the
first multiplication, so I have
to put this cell, this number
Multiplied by this number. This is
the result. And the integer
part, as you can see is here is
0. So in order to keep the
integer part, I could say that.
Uh, let me put another example
just to show you that.
Yes, for instance this number.
Uh, it uses this number, so
in order to keep the one, you
can simply use a math
function in Excel, floor.
You can simply calculate the
floor of the, I mean the
fraction number, just to find
the integer part.
And here is the integer part.
And then here you have to
continue the multiplication, but
their remainder by the remainder
fraction parts, so the remainder
fraction part
Is equal to
This number, minus this integer
part. So this is the remainder
fraction part. So basically
you continue the multiplication
based on this new fraction
number. So you just simply have
to repeat this process.
So you can see that I mean, uh,
each time, this time it creates
zero. This time it creates 0. So
0.204 multiplied by
three. And then you put the
digits in the right order, so
the conversion is based on
the radix number 3, so this is
0.1001211120? And you see
that there is no end to
that. So if I calculate
this for a lot of cells.
You can see that it generates
more and more numbers.
So this is another hint
when you convert the fraction
part, you might end up with a
number that is not exactly the
same number, so you have to add
more precision in order to
convert exactly. But if you are
limited to just, for instance
here 6 positions, you have to
just finish it here.
1 2
1. And then you have to remove
all these. Uh, numbers, so
although this is not the exact
number for this decimal
number. But it is very
similar and all the other
fraction parts of the error.
So this way you can use Excel to
convert the fraction numbers in
decimal system to any system
just by multiplying by 10.
Uh, but by that base.
Multiplying the fraction part
by eight or four or two, and
then put the integer part in
the right order.
So if you are given a number
which has integer part and
fraction part from base R base
or R', you have to convert it
to the base decimal system or
base 10 and then from base 10 to
base R'.
And then for the integer part,
you do the exact algorithm,
division by 10. If you want to
convert from R to ten,
you have to multiply
by powers of 10.
And then from 10 to our prime
you have to divide it by our
prime for the integer part and
then put the remainder in the
reverse order. For the fraction
part, from R to 10, you have
to multiply each digit to the
powers of 10 by decreasing
number of power from -1 to
- M from 10 to our prime. For
the fraction part you have to
multiply by R'. Keep the
integer parts and then put it in
the right order.
For instance, if you're given
this number in base 10 and we
wanted to convert this to base
eight, you can simply. First you
have to do for the integer part
you are already in the base 10,
so we have to convert the
integer part to base-8, so
just divid it by 8.
And then put the remainder in
the reverse order. For the
fraction part, we multiply by 8
and then keep the integer part
and put it in the right order.
So there's a very fast way for
numbering system when the bases
are powers of two. For instance,
if you are converting base-2
to base-4, base-8, base-16,
there is no need for you to
convert the base-2 to base 10
and then from base 10 to base
four, or base 10 to base-8.
There's a fast way, so as a
lecture assignment, I put it in
one of the practices in the
lecture assignment. So you can
see how can we do
this. Base two to base-4 or
base-2 to base-8 or base
two to base-16 or any radix
number based on the 2 to the
power of N in a fast way. Also
the reverse if you are given a
number in base-4 in order to
convert it to base-2. Normally
you have to convert this fourth
base 10 and base 10 to base-2,
but there's a fast way to do
that because four is 2 to the
power of 2. And you can use
that fast algorithm which is
in the lecture assignment.
For another example, it
would be if you are given a
number in base-8 and you want
to convert it to base-2.
Normally you have to convert
base-8 to base 10 and
base 10 to base-2, but here by using this
algorithm we can directly
convert base-8 to base-2.
And here is the link to a
website. So let me
open this for you.
There's a website that, uh,
actually, this website is a
pretty cool website. It
can convert any fraction
number in any basis to a
target base. So for instance,
15 based on the base
And if you want to convert
it to base-2.
Actually, this is the result.
Well, if you want to convert
15.250 and you want to
convert this to two, it becomes
this and it gives you the
error, possible error.
So you can see that the
conversion error here is 0, but
if I add for instance add one.
The error is this, so you
cannot exactly convert this
number to binary number.
And it produced this error.
And you already saw this error,
why this happens.
So you can check your answers in
your lecture assignments by this
website. For instance, if you
are given this number in base-16
and you want to convert it to
two. Here's the result, and this
is the error. But the thing is,
in your lecture assignment, you
have to show the steps.
So, you can check your final
answer by this website but you
have to show these steps in
your lecture assignments in
order to be graded so you can
use Excel and then put the I
mean, the steps from the
Excel to your lecture
assignment and you can use
this website to just see
whether you are doing correct
or not.
And let's go back to the
Slides.
So is there any question?
So far? Sean.
I don't think there's any
new questions.
OK. So we can continue. Now
we know how to represent
numbers in different numbering
systems, decimal, binary or
octal or hexadecimal or any
basis. Now we want to do
arithmetic. I mean, addition,
subtraction, multiplication and
division for numbers in
different numbering systems. We
already knew how to do in
decimal system, but we wanted to
see what's the algorithm in
other numbering system.
So the first is addition.
Very similar algorithm,
as you saw before. I
mean, whenever you want to come
up with an algorithm in any
other numbering system, we use
decimal system as the reference.
So whatever we did in the
decimal system, we can use it
for any other numbering system.
For conversion, we do the same.
For the addition, we can do the
same so we know how to do the
addition in decimal system, so
we can apply the same algorithm
in other bases. For instance,
here is an example. So if you
want to convert if you want
to do addition on the base-16 or
hexadecimal. Here is an
example. The first step is if
you are given these two numbers,
fraction with fraction parts.
This is the fraction point.
So the first is you have to pad
the numbers, you have to make the
size of the numbers equal.
You can add zeros to the left of
the integer part because it
doesn't have any impact.
You can add 0 to the right side
of the fraction part because
again, adding a zero in the
right part of the fraction part
doesn't have any impact.
When you do the padding, you
have the same size of numbers.
And then you start
adition. So 4 + 0 is 4.
5 + B, which is equal to 11, becomes
16. 16 cannot be represented in
base-16, so you have to divide
it by the base-16 so it ends up
with one and the remainder is
zero. You put the remainder and
then put the quotient as they
carry to the next position.
1 + E + 2 becomes 17. 17, again,
you have to break it into base
of 16 so it becomes. The
remainder is 1 and the carry is
1, so it becomes one and the
carry goes here.
1 + A + F becomes 26.
An 26 / 16 is 1 and the
remainder is10. So you keep that
remainder and then put the
quotient as the carry.
But you know that 10 is equal to
A and then you continue this
summation 1 + 2 + B, which is
equal to 11 becomes 14. 14 is E.
And then 0 + 4 becomes 4. This
is the simplest actually, I mean
algorithm we can do for
addition of any number in any
numbering system. Here is
just an example
in base-16.
Multiplication is, as you know,
very similar to addition. You
just repeat the addition.
So you can follow the same
algorithm in decimal system.
We're not going to cover it, so
it's easier for you. We might,
Please study this. We might put
it as practice in
the next lecture assignments or
we can ask you to do
multiplication in the exam.
So please keep be prepared for
that. Subtraction.
Again very similar to
decimal system. So basically the
first step is just doing the
padding and then start the
Subtraction. 4 - 0, it becomes 4.
5 - B (eleven) cannot be done
, so we have a concept
called borrow, so we borrow from
the a higher position, higher
significant position. So we
borrow from E 1 unit. When we
borrow one year from the higher,
higher significant position we
we add based on the
base-16, so we add 16 units in
the lower position.
And then we can do the negation
subtraction. So 16 + 5
- 11 becomes 10, which is
equal to A.
So here we already
borrowed from this step,
so -1 + E - 2.
So it becomes 11, eleven is equal
to B, so 14 - 1, because we
already borrowed from this, is 13. 13
- 2 becomes 11.
11 is called B in base
16. So again, A - F is equal
to. We cannot do that. We need
to borrow, so we borrowed 16 +
10 - 15 becomes 11.
Now we have to subtract 11 from
2 or B from two. It's not
possible, you already borrowed
from this position, so we need
another borrow. So 16
+ 2 - 1, we already
borrowed from that, minus 11,
so becomes 6.
And then. Minus one.
+ 0 - 4, we cannot do that.
We need another borrow.
So 16 - 1 is 15 plus zero.
15 - 4 = 11.
But we need the last borrow,
we know in the decimal system
when we have a last borrow, it
means that the result is
negative. The result? I mean,
the first number is smaller than
the second number. So when we
have this situation, we have to
apply that last borrow.
So in order to apply that last
borrow, you have to subtract the
result from the borrow we
already borrowed from. Because we
assume that there is such a
number. So when we do this
subtraction. So 0 from
4 needs a borrow. 16 +
0 - 4 = 12 and etc.
So you can see that the result
is 494.45C.
But the result is negative
because we already had last
borrow, so we put this as a
result, minus this number.
So the division is very similar to
subtraction, so again very
similar to algorithm in decimal
system. So you can follow the
same algorithm and we are not
going to cover it today, but
practice it at home.
And now, is
there any questions?
I can see some questions about
subtraction again, so let me
come back to the subtraction.
So for this subtraction, let me
share my camera first in order
just to review what we've done
in the decimal system.
So in decimal system,
for instance, we want to subtract
5 from for instance 9.
The thing is, we can not
subtract 9 from 5, so we need to
borrow, so we assume that there
is a number.
10 or 10
In decimal system that we can
borrow from, so then we borrowed
this one. It comes here so when
it comes here because it's
in a higher position, it
goes here as 10.
So here it becomes +10.
And then +10 + 5
becomes 15. 15 - 9. Now we
can do the subtraction. 15
- 9 becomes 6.
OK, but do you know that? I
mean, we already know that 5 - 9
is equal to -4.
We already knew that, but assume
that we don't know the result.
So this is the result, but this
is the result
Without applying the number we
borrowed from so now we have to
apply that number because we
borrowed from that number. We
assume that this number there
that we can borrow from. So now
if we wanted to apply that
number. So then 10 -
6 becomes here.
You need to borrow count here, 10
and this becomes -1.
So 10 - 6 becomes 4.
And -1
+ 1 - 0 becomes 0.
And because we had a last borrow,
oh, we know that this number
Is negative, so this
is the result of the
5 - 9, not this one.
Because we needed last
borrow, so we assume that
there is a higher number that
we can borrow from that. Then
we end up with the result we
have to apply that number. So
the same principle here.
So when we do the, uh,
let me share my
screen again.
So when we do the subtraction,
the 1st digit, 4 - 0, is possible,
so it becomes 4.
But here 5 cannot be
subtracted from 11 or B, so we
need to borrow. So we borrow
from the higher position. So
when we borrow 1 unit, we
subtract 1 unit from this
position. And then when it goes
to the disposition at the unit
of 16 as we did in the decimal
system as the unit of time.
And then this is what we
borrowed. So this 16 + 5 becomes
21. Now we can do the
Subtraction. 21 - 11 becomes 10.
Or A, so the same goes
up until here.
So again, here -1 we
already borrowed because of
this position. -1 + 0
becomes -1 - 4. We
cannot do that because
Four, I mean this number is
smaller than this, so we need
another borrow. So this number
with this borrower, we assume
that there is a higher number
that we can borrow from.
And then we can do
this subtraction, but
we have last borrow.
So by the last four, we know
that the result is negative, so
this is not a correct result. So
we have to apply that number we
borrowed from. So then we
subtract the
results of the previous
subtraction from that number
that we borrowed from.
And this is the subtraction. So
0 - 4 is not possible. We need
to borrow 16. 16 + 0 - 4 becomes
12. This A cannot be
subject from -1,
so we need to borrow. 16
-1 = 15. 15 - A = 5, and etc.
So this is the ending result,
but we know that this is
negative. I mean this is
a positive number,
but the actual subtraction
going to be negative because
of the last borrow.
So is there any other questions?
Mia asked that I mean, uh.
Yes, when you borrow when you're
in the base R, when you borrow
from the higher position, it
adds R to the lower position.
In decimal when you borrow it adds
plus 10. In base-16, it adds plus
16. In base-8, it adds plus
eight. Yes true.
And, uh.
Abdulwahhab says that? I
mean, it can be right.
Four in such as 04, there is no
difference between 04 and
four because adding zero to the
left side is doesn't have any
impact, so that's OK.
Ah.
So there's another question.
Nolis says that we can
replace five with 10.
I'm not sure I understand
this question.
So can you explain it more?
You can raise your hand and you
can explain your question.
OK OK I got that OK thank you.
So let's move on to the next
topic. So far we had.
Uh.
Integer part, fraction part, but
all the numbers were positive.
So now we wanted to expand the
numbering system to have
negative numbers too. So in
decimal system we have -1,
-2, - 5, so let's.
I mean, find a way to
introduce negative numbers
in numbering systems.
So the first uh, here's the I
mean decimal system with just
one position from zero to 9.
These are all positive.
So now we wanted to
introduce negative numbers
of these positive numbers.
For instance, we wanted to
have -1, -2 and etc.
The immediate solution would be
just adding a new position.
And then put minus there.
So  -0, -1, -2, -3 and
etc. But we know that minus is
not the is not a valid digit in
decimal system. In decimal
system the symbols are zero to
9. So instead of just using
the symbol minus, we can
assume that we put one
whenever we have one in the 10
to the power of 1 position,
this new position. We assume
that this number is negative.
Or you can say that let's assume
any non 0 number. So as long as
there is a non 0 value in
this new position, we can assume
that the number is negative.
But if in this location
the numbers are zero.
Then these numbers are positive.
So basically we add a new
position, but we treat this
position as a sign, so if it
is zero it means that the
number here is positive. If
it is non 0, it means that this
number is negative.
So then you can have negative
and positive numbers with just
one because I mean, 1 digit. So
the positive numbers are here
with zero in the new position.
And these are negative numbers.
You could put two or three or
any non zero values here.
I just simply put one. An
important thing is
Then there is no value on the
significance of the position,
because this position, the only
application of this position is
just to introduce the sign
whether the number is positive
or negative, so it loses the
value as the powers of 10. So
then we cannot assume that this
new position has any power, or 10
significance. It just wanted to
show this sign of the number.
And another issue with this
system is that you have two
zeros, one +0 and one -0.
So this is this system
is called sign magnitude.
Sign magnitude means that if you
are given N positions, you keep
the last position
As the sign position, so it
doesn't have any significance
anymore. So be careful about
that, so you shouldn't
consider this as a
significant position. You
just consider it as a sign.
If it is, 0, it means that all
the non 0 digits in the right
side is positive and if it is
non 0, it means that the number
here is negative.
So you lose one position for a
sign and you keep all the other
positions for the actual value.
So this is called sign
and magnitude, magnitude
is the number itself. So
signed magnitude system.
So in this sign magnitude
system, because you are losing
one position, the last position
, the highest significant
position. So the maximum number
is not anymore R to the power of
N - 1, it is R to the power of
N - 1 minus 1. So you lose one
position. So this is the maximum
positive numbers. Instead of
this you have negative numbers
and your negative numbers
actually starts from again,
Zero up until minus the
maximum positive number.
So the maximum positive number
if you just change the sign
position to non zero, it becomes
negative. So this is the range.
So for now in the sign magnitude
you can represent numbers from
minus or to the power of N - 1 minus
1 to positive or to the power
of N - 1 minus 1.
So this is the whole range of
numbers you can represent in
signed magnitude when you have
integer part. When you have
fraction part, it's very similar. So
for the fraction part you don't
need any sign position because
the integer part
actually shows the sign, so the
same algorithm when as
before for the fraction part
actually applies.
So let's do some arithmetic
in sign magnitude.
We can actually we are done, we
run out of time so we can
continue this
next week. In the lecture
assignment there are some
practices that are related to
the topics we are going to cover
next week, but the deadline is
October 1st, so you have enough
time to do those assignments. So,
Now I'm ready for any
questions if you have.
Sean would you please
just moderate the
questions for me?
Yeah, I'm the first one is are
you gonna Post the assignment
after the class? Yes, just I
mean in one hour, it's
already in
the blackboard, but in one
hour I will make the announcement.
They are asking is the due
date, the 1st or the 7th. Oh
in the
assignment it says what's the
due date? Let me open the.
Let's go to the lectures.
If you go to the lectures
and then you go to the
second week.
Here you can see the
lecture assignment, so
let's just go to the
student view for the same view
as you see.
So let's go to lectures and if
you go to the second week, here
is the assignment. If you go to
the assignment or even if
you open the lecture assignment.
In the top you can see the
deadline. Oh the deadline is
September 30, Wednesday midnight
AoE, which is equal to 1st of
October 7:00 AM Eastern Time.
This is the grade release date.
So after one week you are going
to have your mark for the
assignment, so pay attention to
due dates, so the due date is
September 30, Wednesday at
midnight or October
1st 7:00 AM EST.
Any other questions?
I mean, how much is the weight
of the lecture assignment?
We are going to have 10 lecture
assignments, each one has 2%, so
in total 20%.
So each assignment 2%.
Are you going over
assignment 1 or
assignment 2 for today's
lab?
Oh, the lecture assignment is
not covered by the lab
instructors, only the lab
assignment is going to be
covered by them, so the lecture
assignments you have to do it
alone. So the labs are for lab
assignments. The lecture
assignment is by your own.
Where is the best way
to hand in assignment
because it's on a PDF?
Oh, you mean when you are done the
assignment? So as I said, I mean
you can write in a paper with a
pen or you can use Word or any
text editors. But the thing is
that at the end of the day you
have to make a PDF out of it,
because as I said here, you have
to make it this. I mean
some PDF file, a single PDF
file. You can simply scan all
your papers and then make
it 1 PDF and submit that. Or you
can write your answer in a Word
document and then make it PDF.
And send it. So.
Because the graders
need a PDF file to mark
your assignments.
So any other questions? Yeah,
this is kind of similar to
the one you answered already,
but is the lab times
just for extra questions. Or
will there be in a lab
assignment to complete?
Just for lab assignments, yes,
as I said, the lab sections are
for for the lab assignments,
which is basically programming
assignments, but the lecture
assignments are just math
assignments or I mean doing on
your own without any other help.
One thing is that labs start on the
second week so there were no
assignment in the first week.
So if you go on the My Grades,
you can see that it's due on
October 1st and the lecture is
due on October 1st. But this
is based on the EST time.
Any other questions. Yeah, I'll
give you the shorter one first. So
this week we were going to have
the first lecture assignment,
right? Yes, yes.
And the other one is, can you
share the subtraction of base-16
on the slide again?
Yeah, sure base-16
subtraction.
This one.
So here.
So.
Uh, yeah you can. I mean
share your I mean.
So here is the slide for
subtraction for the base-16.
So any other questions?
Sean.
Yeah, he says the one which was
100000, which is at the
top. Ah, yes this one.
So as I said, then you end up
with the last four, we
assume that there is a, I mean
a bigger number that we can
borrow from that, and that
number is this one
1000.000.
Why do you add this? Because in
this step in this is that we
borrowed this number, but from
where we borrowed that, we assume
that there is a number with
1000000 and then from that
number we borrowed one unit.
So this all comes from that
number, but when we are doing
the subtraction here, we assume
that there is a number. So this
is not the right result. So we
have to do another subtraction
from that higher number.
That's the number.
Cool.
So.
Any other questions?
I think that's it. OK, I'm going
to be in the office, so again,
let me show you. How can you
come to the office?
Let me show you how can you come
to the office so you can simply
go to the office here.
And then come to here, you
can see that it's enabled right
now, so you can just join this
session and I'll be there.
Thank you so much for
your attention and
have a good day, bye.